README.rst, before:

Presentation
============

This is a parser for MediaWiki's (MW) syntax. It's goal is to transform wikitext into an abstract syntax tree (AST) and then render this AST into various formats such as plain text and HTML.


Requirements
============

This parser relies on Pijnu. You must install the latest version of Pijnu, available at: https://github.com/peter17/pijnu
Do not use the version from http://spir.wikidot.com, which is outdated.


How it works
============ 

Two files, preprocessor.pijnu and mediawiki.pijnu describe the MW syntax using patterns that form a grammar. Another Python tool called Pijnu will interpret those grammars and use them to match the wikitext content and build the AST.

Then, specific Python functions will render the leaves of the AST into the wanted format.

The reason why we use two grammars is that we will first substitute the templates in the wikitext with a preprocessor before actually parsing the content of the page.


How to test
===========

The current simplest way to test the tool is to put wikitext inside the wikitext.txt file. Then, run:

::

 python parser.py
 
and the wikitext will be rendered as HTML in the article.htm file.

Other ways might be implemented in the future.

Unit tests
----------

Install nose and run:

::

 cd /PATH/TO/mediawiki-parser/
 ln -s ../mediawiki-parser/ mediawiki_parser
 export PYTHONPATH=/PATH/TO/mediawiki-parser/:/PATH/TO/pijnu/
 nosetests tests

How to use in a program
=======================

Example for HTML
----------------
In order to use this tool to render wikitext into HTML in a Python program, you can use the following lines:

::

 templates = {}
 allowed_tags = []
 allowed_self_closing_tags = []
 allowed_attributes = []
 interwiki = {}
 namespaces = {}
 
 from preprocessor import make_parser
 preprocessor = make_parser(templates)

 from html import make_parser
 parser = make_parser(allowed_tags, allowed_self_closing_tags, allowed_attributes, interwiki, namespaces)

 preprocessed_text = preprocessor.parse(source)
 output = parser.parse(preprocessed_text.leaves())

The `output` string will contain the rendered HTML. You should describe the behavior you expect by filling the variables of the first lines:
 * if the wikitext calls foreign templates, put their names and content in the `templates` dict (e.g.: `{'my template': 'my template content'}`)
 * if some HTML tags are allowed on your wiki, list them in the `allowed_tags` list (e.g.: `['center', 'big', 'small', 'span']`; avoid `'script'` and some others, for security reasons)
 * if some self-closing HTML tags are allowed on your wiki, list them in the `allowed_self_closing_tags` list (e.g.: `['br', 'hr']`; avoid `'script'` and some others, for security reasons)
 * if some HTML tags are allowed on your wiki, list the attributes they can use the `allowed_attributes` list (e.g.: `['style', 'class']`; avoid `'onclick'` and some others, for security reasons)
 * if you want to be able to use interwiki links, list the foreign wikis in the `interwiki` dict (e.g.: `{'fr': 'http://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/'}`) 
 * if you want to be able to distinguish between standard links, file inclusions or categories, list the namespaces of your wiki in the `namespaces` dict (e.g.: `{'Template': 10, 'Category': 14, 'File': 6}` where the numbers are the namespace codes used in MW)

Example for text
----------------
In order to use this tool to render wikitext into text in a Python program, you can use the following lines:

::

 templates = {}
 
 from preprocessor import make_parser
 preprocessor = make_parser(templates)

 from text import make_parser
 parser = make_parser()

 preprocessed_text = preprocessor.parse(source)
 output = parser.parse(preprocessed_text.leaves())

The `output` string will contain the rendered text.
If the wikitext calls foreign templates, put their names and content in the `templates` dict (e.g.: `{'my template': 'my template content'}`)

Example for templates substitution
----------------------------------
If you just want to replace the templates in a given wikitext, you can just call the preprocessor and no rendering postprocessor:

::

 templates = {}
 
 from preprocessor import make_parser
 preprocessor = make_parser(templates)

 output = preprocessor.parse(source)

The `output` string will contain the rendered wikitext.
Put the templates names and content in the `templates` dict (e.g.: `{'my template': 'my template content'}`)

Postprocessors
--------------

The parser produces an AST. In order to provide human readable output, three postprocessors are provided:
 * html.py, for HTML output
 * text.py, for text output
 * raw.py, for raw output

For now, we mainly focused on HTML postprocessor. The text output might not be as cleaned as expected.

You can adapt them according to your needs.

Known bugs
==========

This tool should be able to render any wikitext page into text or HTML.

However, it does not intent to be bug-for-bug compatible with MW. For instance, using HTML entities in template calls (e.g.: `'{{temp&copy;late}}`') is currently not supported.

Please don't hesitate to report bugs that you may find when using this tool.

Commit message:

directory restructure and add setup.py
parser files now in their own directory, and a setup.py script can
build through the "build_parsers" command

README.rst, after:

Presentation
============

This is a parser for MediaWiki's (MW) syntax. It's goal is to transform wikitext into an abstract syntax tree (AST) and then render this AST into various formats such as plain text and HTML.


Requirements
============

This parser relies on Pijnu. While the original Pijnu is available at: https://github.com/peter17/pijnu, this fork relies on changes from https://github.com/nickburlett/pijnu
Do not use the version from http://spir.wikidot.com, which is outdated.


How it works
============

Two files, preprocessor.pijnu and mediawiki.pijnu describe the MW syntax using patterns that form a grammar. Another Python tool called Pijnu will interpret those grammars and use them to match the wikitext content and build the AST.

Then, specific Python functions will render the leaves of the AST into the wanted format.

The reason why we use two grammars is that we will first substitute the templates in the wikitext with a preprocessor before actually parsing the content of the page.

Building the parsers
====================

The preprocessor and mediwiki parsers must be built from the Pijnu
grammars before you can use mediawiki-parser. You can build them through
setup.py, possibly setting the PYTHONPATH to point at pijnu:

::
 
 env PYTHONPATH=path/to/pijnu python setup.py build_parsers

How to test
===========

The current simplest way to test the tool is to put wikitext inside the wikitext.txt file. Then, run:

::

 python parser.py
 
and the wikitext will be rendered as HTML in the article.htm file.

Other ways might be implemented in the future.

Unit tests
----------

Install nose and run:

::

 cd /PATH/TO/mediawiki-parser/
 env PYTHONPATH=/PATH/TO/pijnu/ nosetests tests

How to use in a program
=======================

Example for HTML
----------------
In order to use this tool to render wikitext into HTML in a Python program, you can use the following lines:

::

 templates = {}
 allowed_tags = []
 allowed_self_closing_tags = []
 allowed_attributes = []
 interwiki = {}
 namespaces = {}
 
 from preprocessor import make_parser
 preprocessor = make_parser(templates)

 from html import make_parser
 parser = make_parser(allowed_tags, allowed_self_closing_tags, allowed_attributes, interwiki, namespaces)

 preprocessed_text = preprocessor.parse(source)
 output = parser.parse(preprocessed_text.leaves())

The `output` string will contain the rendered HTML. You should describe the behavior you expect by filling the variables of the first lines:
 * if the wikitext calls foreign templates, put their names and content in the `templates` dict (e.g.: `{'my template': 'my template content'}`)
 * if some HTML tags are allowed on your wiki, list them in the `allowed_tags` list (e.g.: `['center', 'big', 'small', 'span']`; avoid `'script'` and some others, for security reasons)
 * if some self-closing HTML tags are allowed on your wiki, list them in the `allowed_self_closing_tags` list (e.g.: `['br', 'hr']`; avoid `'script'` and some others, for security reasons)
 * if some HTML tags are allowed on your wiki, list the attributes they can use the `allowed_attributes` list (e.g.: `['style', 'class']`; avoid `'onclick'` and some others, for security reasons)
 * if you want to be able to use interwiki links, list the foreign wikis in the `interwiki` dict (e.g.: `{'fr': 'http://fr.wikipedia.org/wiki/'}`) 
 * if you want to be able to distinguish between standard links, file inclusions or categories, list the namespaces of your wiki in the `namespaces` dict (e.g.: `{'Template': 10, 'Category': 14, 'File': 6}` where the numbers are the namespace codes used in MW)

Example for text
----------------
In order to use this tool to render wikitext into text in a Python program, you can use the following lines:

::

 templates = {}
 
 from preprocessor import make_parser
 preprocessor = make_parser(templates)

 from text import make_parser
 parser = make_parser()

 preprocessed_text = preprocessor.parse(source)
 output = parser.parse(preprocessed_text.leaves())

The `output` string will contain the rendered text.
If the wikitext calls foreign templates, put their names and content in the `templates` dict (e.g.: `{'my template': 'my template content'}`)

Example for templates substitution
----------------------------------
If you just want to replace the templates in a given wikitext, you can just call the preprocessor and no rendering postprocessor:

::

 templates = {}
 
 from preprocessor import make_parser
 preprocessor = make_parser(templates)

 output = preprocessor.parse(source)

The `output` string will contain the rendered wikitext.
Put the templates names and content in the `templates` dict (e.g.: `{'my template': 'my template content'}`)

Postprocessors
--------------

The parser produces an AST. In order to provide human readable output, three postprocessors are provided:
 * html.py, for HTML output
 * text.py, for text output
 * raw.py, for raw output

For now, we mainly focused on HTML postprocessor. The text output might not be as cleaned as expected.

You can adapt them according to your needs.

Known bugs
==========

This tool should be able to render any wikitext page into text or HTML.

However, it does not intent to be bug-for-bug compatible with MW. For instance, using HTML entities in template calls (e.g.: `'{{temp&copy;late}}`') is currently not supported.

Please don't hesitate to report bugs that you may find when using this tool.
